it is completely ridiculous to have a
situation in which two different levels
of government compete for who will
pursue justice as for the first time we
are not waiting on the federal Justice
Department which told in the city of New
York that we could not proceed I heard
this last night in the Democrat primary
Democratic Party presidential primary
debates last night in Detroit they were
saying on stage that the reason why the
state government and local government
couldn't be responsible was because this
federal government Department this part
of the Department of Justice was
competing with them for the case and was
promising that they were going to
deliver justice that is completely
untrue I'm trying to be straightforward
with you and everyone in New York we're
following the law we've got to get
people due process there will be a
result next month if police officers
state officials whomever you are
whatever you do aren't losing jobs when
crimes are committed whether on purpose
or by accident
regular people don't understand the
whole thing doesn't make sense if we
could do it all over again and we're
talking about this happened over two
presidential administrations five years
it's just unfathomable it's never
happened before and that doesn't take
away the pain of the garner family nor
the sense a injustice that everyone is
feeling the whole thing is messed up
from day one right it should never
happen to the beginning Justice
Department should have done its job we
now know we can't depend on them we're
going to do things differently going
forward
the death of Eric garner and the
inability of the American political
system to cope with it in the years that
followed thereafter is a really
important case study for all of us to
learn from not just Americans for people
all around the world in all kinds of
different justice systems and by the way
no I did not just say the failure of the
police to cope with it I did not say the
failure of the court system I mean the
failure of the whole political system of
the whole Democratic Society of the
United States I would say that the
fundamental problems at work here were
already evident back in 1992 with the
Los Angeles Riots I am NOT thinking
primarily of the police role in the Los
Angeles Riots I'm actually thinking of
the death of Letitia Harlan's so for
those of you don't remember many of you
watching this video were not alive and
many of my viewers who knocked in united
states america one of the most important
elements of the 1992 riots in Los
Angeles was violence of African
Americans against Korean immigrants
specifically Korean Americans who owned
corner stores small shops grocery stores
that sort of thing why was that at the
same time as there were other incidents
of police brutality and hostility of the
African American public against police
officers at the same time there was also
a brutal at unprovoked slaying of a
teenage African American girl
in a corner store by a Korean American
shop owner now he um the difference
between the I can't breathe controversy
the Eric garner Cod first see them
talking about this video and the trial
of Latasha Harlan's is that the trial
will attach to Harlan's deeds
successfully convict the Slayer of a
manslaughter sentence it was they were
charged and convicted with manslaughter
however after this person was found
guilty
she was sentenced to merely a $500 fine
and 400 hours of community service if
the judge had served the sentence by the
books and the sentence as recommended by
the jury then the killer would have
received 16 years in prison and instead
she did no prisoner she didn't spend one
day in prison she paid $500 and did 400
hours of community service for murder
you know now look to reveal my own bias
in this in the death of Eric garner I
believe the correct charge would be
murder of some kind in different
jurisdictions as a question of would
this be first degree murder secondary
murder or third degree murder different
societies are going to have to present
an array of options for how murder is
accounted for in the United States of
America a lot of people don't know this
the definition for for premeditation is
very precise and very exacting so the
death of Latasha Harlan's in Los Angeles
back in the 1990's that was premeditated
murder even though it was spontaneous
spontaneity and premeditation are
completely different things now it's
true the shop owner the woman's sitting
behind the counter the shop she didn't
wake up that morning and plan in advance
to kill this young woman but that's not
what premeditation means legally just
the span of time where the shop owner
got angry at this young woman and then
went to get the gun the gun was under
the counter and took the gun out and
decided to kill this young woman that
makes it premeditated murder that that's
all it takes to qualify as premeditation
the United States for something to be
not premeditated it has to be a
situation like you're walking down the
street and someone jumps on your back
from behind and you you know you turn
around and shoot them maybe you don't
even know who they are it has to be that
spontaneous where there's no there's no
capacity for judgment there's no option
to take another course or there's very
little course there's always there's
always a choice take another course but
it's it's very very narrow
what would count as not premeditated and
the most charitable thing I could say
for the judge in that LA
County example from the 1990s Korean
shop owner shooting and killing a
teenage black girl the most generous
thing I can say is I think there is a
tremendous reluctance in the American
legal system to really impose murder on
any situation that is not a Hollywood
movie version of what murder is supposed
to be many many many Hollywood movies
depict
the American legal system and they
influence the whole world our sense of
justice and the process of the law
globally even in China even in Europe
our sense of what the process of the law
is supposed to be is shaped by American
TV shows in American movies that partly
glamorized the American legal system
partly misrepresented and partly
criticized it partly Dhafir critique the
shortcomings of that system but
nevertheless the idea of what murder is
supposed to be I think even for judges
and people in this culture it doesn't
match what this clerk did in the story I
think she was the wife of the owner of
the store she was more or less the owner
and manager of this corner store the the
this woman spontaneously decided to
shoot someone because she got angry and
she was accusing this young girl of
trying to shoplift I mean even if she
were guilty she shouldn't be shot for
shoplifting but never less in fact the
police the police had videotape footage
here so again you see the comparison
Eric Gardner there was video taped
footage proving exactly what happened
there were also two eyewitnesses I have
read the direct eyewitness statements
from one of those two people they were
very young at the time I forget if they
were children or teenagers she was quite
a young girl who was in the in the shop
playing a video game playing an arcade
game and she saw and heard everything
that happened so I saw a long written
statement from her written years later
when she'd grown up but she you know
remembered all inflected aren't you
remember what she said in court so that
was it was really very open-and-shut
case
eyewitness statements but exactly who
said what and who did what and you can
match that up with exactly what happened
in the videotape there was no
possibility that this girl was
shoplifting no reasonable rational
person could have accused her of
shoplifting but of course even if she
attempting to shoplift to shoot her dead
in this circumstance I mean it wasn't
even um it wasn't a situation where for
example somebody at the counter was
defending themselves when a thief is
trying to grab money out of the out of
the counter out of the out of the till
there are some scenarios of that that
legally are very different whether not
they should be morally or ethically
different this is another story so look
we have a situation where cultural
expectations do not match up with the
framework provided with the legal system
there is a tremendous cultural
reluctance which of course you hear from
conservatives of it and everyone else
there is a cultural reluctance to charge
a police officer with murder
whether it's first degree murder second
report or a third degree burn to charge
them with murder for the circumstances
that are shown in such brutally obvious
detail in the the film death the slaying
of Eric garner now again I will reveal
my bias in this case I have a formal
education in political science I studied
political philosophy all my life
it's really easy for me to say with
complete detachment that what happened
in that videotape the death of Eric
Gardner is murder period it's very easy
for me to look at that and say this
should be tried as murder for a police
officer the same way it should be tried
for a normal citizen but the real
tangled knot we get into here which has
been made even worse by various levels
of political dishonesty as different
political parties try to package this
into a kind of product for popular
consumption they are waiting for justice
and I'm going to get justice there's
finally going to be justice I
accomplished that
in the next 30 days in New York you know
why because for the first time we are
not waiting on the federal Justice
Department which told the city of New
York that we could not proceed because
the Justice Department was pursuing
their prosecution really there's a very
active campaign ongoing right now in
2019 especially within the Democrat
Party within the debates for who's going
to be the next president in states
there's a real attempt to misrepresent
the significance of what happened
legally and that was probably true to
some extent five years ago I think it's
worse now the levels of dishonesty and
of course one of the most fundamental
reasons for that is honesty is the
discomfort of members of the political
elite with the reality of just how awful
and dysfunctional the American justice
system is and the total reluctance to
actually reform that justice system okay
so what emerges a first is not offensive
to ever anyone anyone it's not offensive
to everyone that's what I should say
that this is not offensive therefore it
is completely ridiculous to have a
situation in which two different levels
of government compete for who will
pursue justice and that is part of the
story of what happened here
you had a federal department you had a
subsection of the DOJ the federal
Department of Justice publicly competing
for the opportunity to press charges on
this case now if you have an education
and political science it is completely
obvious from day one that under the writ
of the law the DOJ case the federal
Department case would fail that it would
have to at some point stop be cancelled
or be thrown out of court even if you
passed a new law you know you can't um
you can't make that law retroactive it's
too late it could affect future cases
okay the the remit of this special
section of the Department of Justice is
only to handle civil rights cases follow
this care for civil rights cases in
which the offender in which the the
transgressor put it that way the person
transgressing the law does so
now that is a very poorly written law
it's unclear to the general public it's
probably unclear to some lawyers what
that means why willfully why why would
you use an adjective like willfully or
willingly what does that mean the
purpose of that adjective is to
constrain the scope of applicability
okay
typical situation a person has a
conflict with their landlord the
landlord is somehow cheating them or
ripping them off and then they talk to
other tenants in the building and they
also say some of them say hey they also
have had this problem with the landlord
if your landlord is doing this to you
that is a violation of your civil rights
so can you go to this federal Department
of Justice and say hey you have a
special section dealing with civil
rights violations help me out help us
out we have a landlord Valerie supports
know the implied meaning the
significance of these words willingly
willfully the DOJ civil rights
Department will only handle your case if
it's a situation where the landlord was
engaging in in effect racial
discrimination or something closely
similar to racial discrimination
willfully willingly doing so what does
that mean it has to be a scenario in
which you have a landlord let's say it's
a landlord who refuses to allow
mixed-race couples to move in to his
properties let's say it's a landlord who
tries to segregate to have all the black
people over here all the way over here
so what the law is meaning to imply is
that cases are only elevated from the
state level to this federal level
special department if and when if and
only if you're talking about systematic
and intentional racism or some other
kind of bias that's equivalent to racism
violating people's civil rights so as
you know by allegory we now have this
kind of civil rights discourse being
applied to discrimination against
homosexuals or discrimination of any
kind that's comparable to
if the law were written to see that
clearly if the the the delimitation of
the role responsibilities of the federal
government were clear in this way you
wouldn't have the ridiculous situation
we have now we are having lies I can
only call them lies stated by major
politicians that the reason why the
state government investigation and trial
of the police officer or police officers
plural a responsible for the death of
aircard the reason why those legal
proceedings failed they are saying the I
heard this last night in the Democrat
primary Democratic Party presidential
primary debates last night in Detroit
they were saying on stage that the
reason why the state government and
local government couldn't be responsible
was because this federal government
Department this part of the Department
of Justice was competing with them for
the case and was promising that they
were going to deliver justice that is
completely untrue if you just even look
up Wikipedia for the timeline of this
case the state-level prosecution already
failed years ago and now why did it fail
basically because the whole system is
bad because what you need is a law that
states very plainly maybe with some you
know maybe with some two limitations a
police officer is responsible for his or
her own moral conduct to the same extent
it's a civilian if a police officer
does what you see in the video I think
they should be tried with a civilian on
a completely equal basis I do not think
you should have two classes of human
being with two different sets of law
appointment now in the United States you
know a soldier in combat is not tried
under the same law as a civilian in
peacetime and of course you could have
some distinctions I mean if a police
officer breaks into someone's house but
they do so because they actually believe
they have to help someone inside of
course you have to have laws that are
distinguishing what police can do things
that are special or extraordinary but
from my perspective in terms of we're
asking in a perfect world what would
happen here this absolutely should be a
trial for murder how you want to break
down the cat
of first degree second degree third
degree that's another story okay what
you know what are the conclusions we can
draw from this the United States of
America never dealt with these problems
back in 1992 when the LA riots drew such
profound dramatic attention to them all
of these issues of I'm sorry even that
one case of a Korean shop owner shooting
dead a black teenager and then the
reaction happened after that and the
discretionary power of the judge to give
this woman a zero zero days in prison
for murder sorry you can call it
manslaughter it's just murder of another
kind and it was premeditated
by legal definitions premeditated murder
call it manslaughter if you want to and
this woman didn't spend one taken
jailing boy five hundred dollars it's
sickening and it's I don't think any
amount of money can make up for murder
but why was it five hundred dollars and
not five million it's sickening okay
anyone who was alive at that time could
have stopped woken up and said wow we
have really profound problems here with
you know the American justice system
okay of course there are many other
cases especially cases involving police
misconduct but the variant the knot of
questions that came together and was
pulled tight in Los Angeles in 1992
anyone who remembers that anyone can
live through that could say hey all
these questions have been asked before
including specifically police brutality
against African Americans and what
happens in the court system and how
everything police do is considered to be
in good faith and swept these problems
were all spilling guess who was alive
back in 1992 and let's do that Barack
Obama if any of us are being honest with
ourselves the question we have to ask is
why did Barack Obama do nothing about
this for eight years you know whether
you look at the fundamental problem as
being federal government departments
competing with stake every departments a
problem in many ways the problem was
created
because back in the year 1830 the United
States was playing a dishonest game of
pretending America was composed of
states when a reality was composed of
both states and territories there's a
reason why the laws are so vague and
contradictory and self-defeating about
who is responsible for what and that is
because a large part of the history at
the continental United States had to do
with the interaction between states and
territories to a limited extent that
still does showed up to American Samoa
showed it to all the u.s. army bases and
other unincorporated territories that
are still part of the American Empire in
reality there was a much bigger deal
between whatever 1750 and 1850 in terms
of shaping the way the federal
government local government way to each
other the creation of the FBI is much
later than all that but it only makes
things more complicated blah blah blah
long story it's a long story of nobody
wanting to take responsibility and
actually set up a systematic well
working justice system for something as
obvious as murder you know pretty
central to our concept of how the
justice system is supposed to work
secondly there are even deeper roots
here which is that throughout the whole
of the British Empire there was a
profound cultural and legal standard
that no soldier and no police officer
could ever be held responsible for
actions undertaken in good faith you
find that in the British Empire not just
in Canada Australia the United States
you find that even in India also by the
way when you go back to the old days
there really was no distinction between
a police officer and a soldier when you
go back 200 years or something somebody
with a gun who represents the government
in some sense in Canada could even be
something with a gun
working for the Hudson Bay Company you
know we had corporate armies we had
corporations with crown powers given to
them by the Queen and then they had
their own police all kinds of of course
colonisation companies in India and all
these things so it was a very different
situation and having a really firm
distinction between the military and the
police or officers of the peace somewhat
later development but there was a
profound convict
that no police officer should be held
responsible for anything they do as long
as it was done in good faith so thus
police recklessness police were immune
from charges for anything that was due
to recklessness or sincere and
competence where they were trying to
carry out their duties they just ended
up massacring people or they ended up
choking one person to death if you go
back to the period immediately before
the American Revolution it's a great
irony that the hatred of Americans
against the British Empire was very
largely fallen aided by it was based on
it was a reaction to the brutality of
British soldiers and sometimes British
police officers were kind of the same as
soldiers he imprecisely these
circumstances that many Americans stood
up and said hey we don't want to be
treated this way and yet they created
actually a legal system and a political
system that very much continues the same
brutal imperious powers of the police
and military that the British Army of
the British Army was notorious for in
those same 13 colonies at that time the
British in India set up these terrible
practices of where no officer could be
held accountable for anything they did
in good faith what that meant in effect
was the only type of crime a police
officer could be held accountable for
would be something like corruption
taking bribes not acting in good faith
or some kind of systematic and
intentional exploitation of the people
just as and if here's the parallel you
have this vaguely written law that this
police officer could only be held
accountable if he wilfully violate
someone's civil rights so this police
officer in order for the case to be
elevated to that Department of Justice
federal charges the reality this is
plain as day from day one it was obvious
five years ago as always anytime if you
just read the law and how Department of
Justice federal jurisdiction applied to
this okay the only way that this police
officer could have been held accountable
by the federal government by the DOJ
would be if he were systematically and
intentionally violating this person's
civil rights and that is irrelevant to
the charge we're discussing here which
is the reckless
irresponsible use of authority the
reckless use of violence and also not to
put too fine a point on it murder the
biggest gang in this city you know that
the buys you all know we say the biggest
gang in the city is the police